.\"
.\" anubis.1 --
.\"
.TH anubis 1 "" "" "GNU Anubis"
.SH NAME
GNU Anubis - an outgoing mail processor and the SMTP tunnel.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "anubis"
[options]
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B GNU Anubis
is an outgoing mail processor. It goes between the MUA (Mail User
Agent) and the MTA (Mail Transport Agent), and can perform on the fly various
sorts of processing and conversion on the outgoing mail in accord with the
sender's specified rules, based on a highly configurable regular expressions
system. It operates as a proxy server, independently from mail user agents.

.SH THE GNU ANUBIS MANUAL

The full documentation for
.B GNU Anubis
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and GNU Anubis programs are properly installed at your site,
the command
.IP
.B info anubis
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.

.SH REPORTING BUGS

Please send any bug reports, improvements, comments,
suggestions, or questions to <bug-anubis@gnu.org>.

Before reporting a bug, make sure you have actually found
a real bug. Carefully reread the documentation and see if it
really says you can do what you are trying to do. If it is
not clear whether you should be able to do something or not,
report that too; it's a bug in the documentation!

.SH FILES
.HP
.I /etc/anubisrc
- system configuration file
.HP
.I ~/.anubisrc
- user configuration file

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR grep (1),
.BR regex (7),
.BR perlre (1),
.BR pcre (3),
.BR sendmail (8),
.BR openssl (1),
.BR gpg (1),
.BR identd (1),
.BR pam (8),
.BR tcpd (8)

.SH AUTHORS

The Anubis Team (read the AUTHORS file).
.P
.PD 0
GNU Anubis Home Page:
.P
http://www.gnu.org/software/anubis/
.PD

.SH LICENSE

GNU Anubis is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.P
GNU Anubis is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.P
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with GNU Anubis; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.P
GNU Anubis is released under the GPL with the additional exemption that
compiling, linking, and/or using OpenSSL is allowed.

